Three men once lived in a small town in Texas. One was a musician, another was an artist, and the other was a poor homeless man. One day the artist was going to start working on a new sculpture, but didn't have the necessary tools to start. He went downtown and saw a poor homeless man. Because the artist was new in town and got lost, he asked the homeless man where the nearest art supply store was. The homeless man told him that it was the red and white building around the corner. The artist looked at him and said thank you. He gave the homeless man a ten-dollar bill with the words "pass it forward" written on the bill. The homeless man took the money and said: "God bless you!"
 
A few hours had passed, and the homeless man started getting hungry. He walked around in town, and saw a young musician playing outside a café. The homeless man sat down and started listening to the music played by the musician. A waiter from the café came out and told the homeless man that he had to leave, because he wasn't buying anything, and other people wanted to sit down and enjoy the music. The musician saw this and told the waiter to leave him alone and that he would like to buy the homeless man something to eat. The waiter looked at the musician and said okay. The homeless man thanked the musician. After he finished eating, he took out the ten-dollar bill and gave it to the musician. The homeless man left.
After the musician had finished playing at the café, he decided to go to a local art festival with his girlfriend. As they were walking around and looking at all the different paintings and sculptures, the musician's girlfriend saw a sculpture she liked. It was a young man helping out an older man who had fallen down. She wanted to buy it, but didn't have enough money. The musician told her not to worry. He pulled out ten dollars, and gave it to the artist. As the musician and his girlfriend walked away, the artist looked at the ten-dollar bill, and smiled. "Well, look at that, you found your way back home," said the artist.