including a private gym. The seven-deck superyacht also comes with two pools, numerous jacuzzi, and a hair stylist and barber.
Yet in a global climate of haves and have-nots, is it morally justifiable to spend $1 billion on a private yacht catering for 36 guests ?
 To be honest, what ordinary mortals think is moral,is not actually relevant to these people, said Kampfner.
 You have to understand that we 're not talking about the top 1 % -- in this instance we 're talking about the 0.01 %. This is a tiny group who live in their own bubble, they mix only among themselves. 
Timm sees things differently, pointing to the employment opportunities created during the building and running of the superyacht.
 The boat will take approximately two to three million human hours to build -- not counting all the worldwide subcontractor hours, or the ready-made items already available on the market ready to be installed on the yacht, he said.
 Building the yacht at the shipyard will directly employ, at the minimum, 500 people for a period of three years. These people, who have families to support and feed, will be gainfully employed.
 And this does not include the 50 to 70 people who will work on the yacht and will be employed full time by the yacht owner, as well as others who supply the yacht. 
He extends this reasoning to the media -- You, the journalist, benefits from this build indirectly by being gainfully employed by CNN for writing this story. 
And you, the person reading this story ? Kampfer sees the public's interest in the lifestyles of the super rich as a type of luxury porn.
 There is an enormous sense of injustice which is shared not just by the poor, but also by the middle class, towards the global super rich, he said.
 But together with that however, is a sense of envy and ogling. So whether you call it confusion, or double standards, or hypocrisy, or whatever it might be -- we both abhor the lifestyles of the super rich and at the same time we are endlessly fascinated by them. 
Photo gallery: Spectacular superyachts of the future
Experience: Secret life of a superyacht stewardess
