Fashion during recession
Current economic trends present an opportunity
for many people to look at fashion in a way they
haven’t before.
Many consumers are looking for fashion that is
not only affordable, but stylish as well. According
to some fashion experts, this has forced
designers and retailers to lose the excess fluff
and get back to the meat and potatoes of their
lines and offerings. That can mean clothes with
a better fit and designs that are more in tune
with their target markets, says Amanda Lovell,
department chair of Fashion Design at The Art
Institute of New York City.
“By making less and offering less, there is a
stronger focus on producing items that are
known sellers,” Lovell says. “Designers and
retailers need to get the most out of every
purchase a customer makes, due to the fact
that customers are thinking twice before buying
excess pieces.”
Each fashion brand, designer, and retailer has
items that are known sellers, Lovell explains. “For
example, the Gap most likely sells their shortsleeve Crewneck or V-neck, black fitted T-shirts
for both men and women season after season
regardless of the economy or forces in the trend
cycle,” she offers.
Designers also have responded by offering
lower-priced bridge lines, adds Mary Hall,
who provides money-saving tips on fashion,
dining out, and entertainment in her blog The
Recessionista.
“There are fewer and fewer high-end collections
with high prices coming out,” says Hall, a Los
Angeles marketing manager. “Now we have
Norma Kamali at Walmart, Vera Wang and
Dana Buchman at Kohl’s, and the annual H&M
designers. It makes fashion so much more
accessible to consumers.”
And as fashion focuses on getting more bang for
the buck, shoppers are on the hunt for versatile
clothing items that have a long shelf life.
“We all just got a little wiser and started
exercising the power of the purse,” Hall states.
“We are shopping smarter. The new differentiator
is value along with the best price.”
Lovell agrees. “I believe from a consumer point
of view, they are looking for pieces to add to their
wardrobes that will take them further and have
more staying power,” she offers. “Classic pieces
have been trending well.”
To keep them looking up-to-date, many
designers just give them a slightly newer spin.
“Pieces such as the basic cardigan are receiving
a face-lift with added bobbles and trimmings and
simple touches in updating the buttons, or the
cut,” Lovell comments. “This is an example of a
classic piece that women can wear and depend
on year round. I see customers buying these
pieces that they can get more wear out of.”
Classic items aren’t the only things popular in the
down economy. Many thrift stores are seeing a
boost in sales. According to a member survey by
the National Association of Resale & Thrift Shops,
slightly more than 64% of stores had an average
increase in sales of 31%.
Lovell also says there’s a resurgence of people
mending their clothes and accessories before
replacing them with new items. “For example,
shoe repair shops have noticed an increase in
business, as consumers bring in their shoes to be
repaired as opposed to purchasing a new pair,”
she explains.
“Overall, trends in consumer buying behaviors
change with what is going on socially, politically,
and economically in the world. The fashion
industry just needs to ride out this wave and
consumers will soon be spending in excess as
before,” Lovell opines.
However, some say the recession has prompted
them to become more responsible in their
spending habits – a change that could be
permanent for many consumers.