Today has been a difficult day filled with arguments.
I left university after completing my graphic design course in the
summer. Until then I had lived in various subsidised university
accommodation over four years. So leaving a sheltered life and
having to find accommodation in the market place was a real
shock. We decided, two girls and two boys, to find a flat, and I
volunteered to speak to the flat-owners.
At first sight one would think that our university town would be
an easy place to find accommodation. All the heavy industry and
manufacturing industries closed down a couple of decades ago
and many people moved away to find work, so compared with the
country as a whole house prices are low here. Flats of various
sizes are available, but finding a cheap flat of a reasonable size
affordable for four young people was challenging.
Like any sizeable town, ours has districts with different housing. Goldmark in the west contains
most of the wealthy housing and we didn’t bother looking there. Newtown way out to the south
is mostly prefabricated housing blocks with high levels of unemployment but very little going on
at the cultural level. After eliminating those areas, we confined our search to Babylon in the east
with its multicultural background.
Of the four of us three were living on savings and welfare payments. Paul, one of the boys,
had a night job working in a twenty-four hour mini-supermarket in the town centre. Our poor
economic profile meant that flat owners were reluctant to rent to us, fearing that we would
default on our rent payments. In the end we claimed to have jobs that we did not. If we hadn’t
done so, we wouldn’t have found anywhere.
By far the most disturbing aspect during our search was the run-down character of so much of
the property on offer. Much of it fell far below legal standards: the gas and electricity systems
were poorly maintained and the sewage systems were below standard. Usually these properties
were meagerly furnished and were extremely dirty. We had to choose the least worst option
which was a three-roomed flat on the fourth floor of a tenement building.
We moved in today. The landlord asked for a thousand Euro deposit and three months rent in
advance. With great difficulty we complied. The place is filthy and I have drawn up a list of work
that needs to be done to make the place liveable. As we only have three rooms we drew lots
to see who would end up with the kitchen: the other girl, Dora, chose the short straw. Well, she
can make cups of tea during the night.
Anyway I must sign off now as I have work to do.
J