The longest truck in the world
In the outback of Australia, Jeremy Hart hitched a ride on the Centipede.
‘If I take my foot off the accelerator, it’ll take us
about four kilometres to stop,’ says Matt
Langley, the Australian captain of the
Centipede, which, at approximately 54.5 metres,
and consisting of a driver’s cab and six trailers,
is claimed to be the world’s longest truck. Matt
has a delicate touch. His hands, on the 60 cm
steering wheel, control a million dollars’ worth of
trailers carrying zinc ore.
 One false move on the narrow 128-km road
from McArthur River Mine, the world’s largest
zinc mine, to the port at Bing Bong and the
Centipede, with its 110 wheels, would crash.
However, in two years of delivering valuable
loads of powdered zinc ore from mine to coast,
the truck has had only one accident. x1xx7xx
 I asked him about the job. ‘The hardest thing
is the concentration. The road is really boring
and in places it is a bit rough. One problem is
the fact that you are pulling six huge trailers
behind you. x2xx xx I’d hate that to happen to
me.’
 Almost 60 metres ahead of the last trailer,
high above the road in the air-conditioned
comfort of Matt’s cab, you can lose almost all
sense of pulling 130 tonnes of raw material.
x3xx xx This movement is repeated down the
length of the Centipede. Matt is in control but
you can see it takes a real effort.
 In this most remote northern corner of
Australia, traffic is not a problem for Matt and
his co-driver, Mick Webster. ‘Some days we
don’t see another vehicle on the run to Bing
Bong, but when we do, we try to be as
courteous as possible,’ says Matt. ‘ x4xx xx
In any case, some are too scared to try.
Others think this is just a normal-sized
vehicle with two or three trailers attached.
When they see it’s six, they either back off or
go by us with their mouths wide open.’
 The truck is breaking new ground in
technology. The Northern Territory
government had to change the regulations to
legalise the Centipede for road use. ‘ x5xx x
They’re sealed with covers to prevent ore
dust from polluting the environment, and they
have a special loading and off-loading
device.’
 It took just under two hours, in a
temperature of 40 degrees, to crawl at no
more than 64 kph from McArthur Mine to Bing
Bong. x6xx xx
 On arrival at his destination Matt punched
a button to unload the zinc onto the floor of
the huge cyclone-proof warehouse where it is
kept before being shipped to Europe and
Asia. It didn’t look like much. ‘When you see
how small a full load looks when it’s unloaded
onto the floor of the warehouse, it’s very
frustrating,’ he says. ‘ x7xxx x ’ I asked him
how he enjoyed the job. ‘I wouldn’t do
anything else, mate,’ was his reply.