The investigation considered farmers’ readiness to take part in crop insurance in the Dormaa municipality of the Bono Region, Ghana. Essential information from 167 respondents who were chosen through a multi-stage sampling method for the study was collected through a structured questionnaire. Elements influencing readiness to participate in crop protection by cocoa farmers was evaluated using probit regression model and lastly constraints of cocoa farmers were assessed utilizing Kendall’s coefficient of concordance. The study found that the average amount farmers were eager to pay was GH₵215.59 per year for crop insurance. Majority 96.7% of the respondents were eager to participate in crop insurance but 3.3% of the respondents were not willing to take part. The important factors influencing readiness to join crop insurance by the farmers were age, marital status, access to extension service and experience in cocoa farming. Again, the foremost constraint affecting the farmers was pests and diseases. The study therefore recommends that agricultural extension agents and other agricultural insurance stakeholders should sensitize crop farmers on the significance of crop insurance policy. Insurance companies ought to give crop insurance to farmers at moderate rates of GH¢ 215.59 per year to encourage their participation.
Key words: Crop insurance, cocoa, probit regression, Dormaa Municipal assembly, Ghana.
 INTRODUCTION
Agriculture is critical to the economy of each emerging nation including Ghana since it utilizes around 66% of the labour force in Ghana; both formal and casual. The agriculture subsector grew by 4.8% in 2018 contrasted with a development pace of 6.1% in 2017. Agriculture’s portion of gross domestic product dropped from  21.1% in 2017 to 19.7% in 2018. Crops are another major engagement in Ghana with a portion of 14.5% of gross domestic product (Ghana Statistical Service, 2019). Despite the fact that the contribution of farming to Ghana's Gross domestic product has dropped over the years, it continues to be a powerful force in the  economy  (ISSER, 2011). A fundamental profitable area and a significant source of export income for Ghana over the past years have been cocoa. Briesinger et al. (2011) showed the portion of cocoa in agrarian gross domestic product surge from 13.7% in 2000 to 2004 to 18.9% in 2005/2006. The momentous role of cocoa to Ghana's income in addition to the reality it helps as a key wellspring of work for many Ghanaian farmers implies its future against any unexpected conditions should be secured. This is on the grounds that any significant disaster in this sector will negatively affect both the macroeconomic and the microeconomic areas of the economy. Despite the fact that danger in the agricultural sector is inevitable, it can be managed.
Cocoa production differ markedly on yearly basis because of unpredicted climate conditions, pests and disease invasions and sporadic economic situations triggering harvests and prices to sway widely. Cocoa production ought to be given more consideration to enlarge Ghana's income and in addition to assist with settling the food security challenges in parts of the nation.
As per Oluyole and Sanusi (2009) prior investigations recognized some significant explanations behind differences in cocoa output which include low harvest, impulses of environment, extreme climate situations, infection occurrence, pest invasion, and regular dangers like heavy downpour, erosion and long dry seasons. High risks and uncertainties related with agricultural production has been ascribed to the decline in production of cocoa (Aderinola and Abdulkadri, 2007). This is due to the fact that similar to other crops, cocoa needs extensive uninterrupted and incessant interaction with the forces of nature. These threats and vulnerabilities are unpredicted and they are outside the capability of the farming households, subsequently, the farmers can just cope with them. Cocoa farmers incur huge losses on savings and income due to the losses suffered from these hazards and uncertainties. In the light of this, Ajakaiye and Adeyeye (2001) discovered that smallholder-farming households in many emerging nations of the world with no exception to Ghana are ensnared in the rancorous pattern of insufficiency.  This succession is portrayed by low output and low returns from the farm, occasioning in practically no sparing funds, necessary for the revolution of their farming expedition, accordingly adding to the low position conferred on farmers within the populace. Conversely, Quagrainie (2006) prescribed that insurance could be utilized to abate financial expenses of numerous hostile events, for example, deaths, accidents, burglary and weather damages. Insurance is defined as an agreement between two parties where one party called the insurer agrees to an exchange called premium to pay the other party a fixed measure of money in the event of sudden incident (Adams 1995).  As indicated by Sarris (2002), insurance warrants a base cost for an explicit amount over a determined duration for which the safety net   provider  pays  a  forthright premium.  Nevertheless, insurance affords the prospect for societies to substitute risk with known rate. Individuals procure insurance coverage hoping to receive a sum, anytime the policyholder encounters protection secured misfortune (Nimo et al., 2011). As indicated by Aidoo et al. (2014), a large portion of the insurance agencies in Ghana offer numerous protection plans (for example accident coverage, life and medical coverage, fire protection and burglary) apart from crop insurance scheme.