Like most contemporary counterfactual theories, Lewis’s theory employs a possible world semantics for counterfactuals. Such a semantics states truth conditions for counterfactuals in terms of similarity relations between possible worlds. Lewis famously espouses realism about possible worlds, according to which non-actual possible worlds are real concrete entities on a par with the actual world (Lewis 1986e). However, most contemporary philosophers would seek to deploy the explanatorily fruitful possible worlds framework while distancing themselves from full-blown realism about possible worlds themselves (see the entry on possible worlds).
The central notion of a possible world semantics for counterfactuals is a relation of comparative similarity between worlds (Lewis 1973a). One world is said to be closer to actuality than another if the first resembles the actual world more than the second does. In terms of this similarity relation, the truth condition for the counterfactual “If A were (or had been) the case, C would be (or have been) the case” is stated as follows:
(1)
“If A were the case, C would be the case” is true in the actual world if and only if either (i) there are no possible A-worlds; or (ii) some A-world where C holds is closer to the actual world than is any A-world where C does not hold.
We shall ignore the first case in which the counterfactual is vacuously true. The fundamental idea of this analysis is that the counterfactual “If A were the case, C would be the case” is true just in case it takes less of a departure from actuality to make the antecedent true along with the consequent than to make the antecedent true without the consequent.
In terms of counterfactuals, Lewis defines a notion of causal dependence between events, which plays a central role in his theory of causation (1973b).
(2)
Where c and e are two distinct possible events, e causally depends on c if and only if, if c were to occur e would occur; and if c were not to occur e would not occur.
This condition states that whether e occurs or not depends on whether c occurs or not. Where c and e are events that actually occur, this truth condition can be simplified somewhat. For in this case it follows from the second formal condition on the comparative similarity relation that the counterfactual “If c were to occur e would occur” is automatically true: this formal condition implies that a counterfactual with true antecedent and true consequent is itself true. Consequently, the truth condition for causal dependence becomes:
(3)
Where c and e are two distinct actual events, e causally depends on c if and only if, if c were not to occur e would not occur.
There are three important things to note about the definition of causal dependence. First, it takes the primary relata of causal dependence to be events. Lewis’s own theory of events (1986b) construes events as classes of possible spatiotemporal regions. However, different conceptions of events are compatible with the basic definition (Kim 1973a; for an alternative broadly Lewisian take on events see McDonnell 2016 and Kaiserman 2017). Indeed, it even seems possible to formulate it in terms of facts rather than events (Mellor 1995, 2004).
Second, the definition requires the causally dependent events to be distinct from each other. Distinctness means that the events are not identical, neither is part of the other, and neither implies the other. This qualification is important if spurious non-causal dependences are to be ruled out. (For this point see Kim 1973b and Lewis 1986b.) For while you would not have written ‘Larry’ if you had not written ‘rr’; and you would not have said ‘Hello’ loudly if you had not said ‘Hello’, neither dependence counts as a causal dependence since the paired events are not distinct from each other in the required sense.
Convinced by the need to make room in his analysis for causation by (and of) absence – as when the gardener’s failure to water the plants causes their death – Lewis later amended his view to the view that causal dependence is a matter of counterfactual dependence between events or their absences (Lewis 2000: §X; 2004b). We shall largely ignore this complication in what follows; for some discussion of causation by absence see Schaffer 2000b, Beebee 2004b, McGrath 2005, Livengood and Machery 2007, Dowe 2009.
Third, the counterfactuals that are employed in the analysis are to be understood according to what Lewis calls the standard interpretation. There are several possible ways of interpreting counterfactuals; and some interpretations give rise to spurious non-causal dependences between events. For example, suppose that the events c and e are effects of a common cause d. It is tempting to reason that there must be a causal dependence between c and e by engaging in the following piece of counterfactual reasoning: if c had not occurred, then d would not have occurred; and if d had not occurred, e would not have occurred. But Lewis says the former counterfactual, which he calls a backtracking counterfactual, is not to be used in the assessment of causal dependence. The right counterfactuals to be used are non-backtracking counterfactuals that typically hold the past fixed up until the time (or just before the time) at which the counterfactual’s antecedent is supposed to obtain. Thus if c had not occurred, d – which in fact occurred before c – would have occurred anyway; so on the standard interpretation, where backtracking counterfactuals are false, the inference to the claim that e causally depends on c is blocked.
