The classic Sorites, or ‘heap argument’, seeks to show that even 10,000 grains do not make a heap, on the ground that (a) three grains do not, and (b) the addition of one grain could never be enough to turn a non-heap into a heap: however often a further grain is added, no precise boundary between non-heap and heap is ever found. Applications of this argument form were widespread in the Hellenistic age, and the Stoic logician Chrysippus wrote many books trying to solve it. Diodorus is a likely source or inspiration for this Hellenistic preoccupation (see previous paragraph).
The Sorites is a particularly lethal weapon when used in the field of semantics, threatening to erase the boundaries on which rigid definitions depend. It may be relevant, then, that Diodorus is reported to have propounded a semantic theory of his own (Aulus Gellius, Attic nights 11.12.1–3; cf. 1 above, the story of his renaming his slave, reported by Ammonius, On Aristotle’s De interpretatione 38.17–20). This was based on the ‘conventionalist’ thesis expressed by the character Hermogenes in Plato’s Cratylus, according to whom nothing but convention—whether national, local or simply private—determines the meaning of a word, and any convenient string of sounds can in principle be used to convey any meaning. Diodorus’s inference from this was that the sole determinant of any word’s meaning is the intention of the utterer on any given occasion on which it is used. He went on to infer that there are no actual ambiguities: given the assumption that a word is on each occasion uttered with one specific meaning in mind, a word has only one meaning at any time.
One may wonder whether this semantic theory, which reduced meaning to utterer’s meaning, was designed to remedy the kind of damage that the Sorites threatened. If meanings are determined purely by the utterer’s intention on each occasion, a radical reconsideration of definitional theory seems in any event to be called for. And it may be that counting the grains becomes simply irrelevant to the determination of what constitutes a heap.
Diodorus was also closely associated with the ‘Veiled’ paradox (Diogenes Laertius, 2.111; Lucian, Sale of lives, 22–3): you know who your father is; you don’t know who the veiled man over there is; but that veiled man is your father; so you both do and do not know who your father is. We might conjecture Diodorus’ own solution to have been once again a semantic one. At each of its occurrences ‘know’ has, in the respondent’s mind, a distinct meaning appropriate to the case (acquaintance, recognition), and hence no contradiction is involved.