Foot was among the pioneers of writing on issues in applied ethics, treating abortion and euthanasia. For reasons only made explicit in later writings, Foot rejects consequentialist views of value, including utilitarianism. Charity, on her account, demands that we aid others, but we cannot do so at the expense of violating rights to non-interference, or negative rights. As Foot puts it, “in so far as a man’s charity is limited only by his justice… he is not less than perfect in charity” (MD 57). But what does justice demand? For Foot, answering this question depends on figuring out the scope of our moral rights, and this is a project that she pursued by reflecting on various thought experiments, some of which have entered popular culture.
Consider a pair of scenarios called Rescue I and Rescue II (MD 80). In both cases, we are driving a jeep along a sea shore and have the chance to save various configurations of stranded people from an incoming tide. In the first case, we are about to save one person from the tide, and spot five others whom we can save, but we cannot save both. In Rescue II, we can save five, but to reach them we would for some reason would have to run over one person, killing him. Foot believes that there is a morally significant difference between these cases. She thinks it is impermissible to save the five in Rescue II; whereas it is permissible (at least) to save the five in Rescue I. On Foot’s view, the significant difference lies in the fact that in Rescue II, saving the five would require initiating a causal sequence that kills one. In Rescue I, by contrast, saving the five is permissible because in this scenario we allow a deadly causal sequence that we did not initiate to run its course. This is not to say that all instances of allowing deadly causal sequences to run their courses are permissible, or that the distinction between doing and allowing always makes a difference to the moral status of an action. The claim is only that the distinction sometimes makes a significant moral difference, as it does in this pair of cases. According to Foot, “it takes more to justify an interference than to justify the withholding of goods and service” (MD 83). At the very least, this means that it is impermissible to kill one person to save another.[5] This distinction relates to the distinction between negative rights, rights to non-interference, versus positive rights, which obligate others to provide some service. Negative rights would enjoin others not to initiate a fatal causal sequence, and positive rights may give rise to an obligation to prevent a fatal causal sequence from running its course. Foot’s contention is that negative rights carry greater weight than positive rights.
In “The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine of Double Effect”, (1967) Foot raises a related case that has been the subject of much subsequent discussion: a runaway trolley is headed toward five people who will be killed by the collision, but it could be steered onto a track on which there is only one person (VV 23). Intuitively, it seems permissible to turn the trolley to hit and kill one person, but the problem is that it does not seem permissible to kill one to save five in cases like Rescue II. Why, Foot asks, can we not argue for the permissibility of killing one to save five in those cases by appealing to the Trolley case? As we have seen, Foot argues that negative rights are generally stronger than positive rights. In Rescue II, we must violate someone’s negative rights to meet the positive rights of others, and this is impermissible because the negative rights have priority over the positive rights that is not outweighed by five people’s need for assistance. In Trolley, by contrast, we are not violating negative rights to meet positive rights; the situation pits the negative rights of the five against the negative rights of one, and both choices involve violating someone’s negative rights. In such a case, it seems clearly preferable to minimize the violation of negative rights by turning the trolley (VV 27).
On Foot’s view, we are generally not permitted to do something to someone that would interfere with someone’s negative rights, for example, we may not steal someone’s property; yet we may not be required to actively secure their possession of it, that is, we may allow them to lose their property. Foot thereby defends a principle that draws a moral distinction between doing and allowing; she also defends a version of the doctrine of double effect, which states that it is sometimes permissible to bring about a result that one foresees as a consequence of one’s action but does not intend that it would be impermissible to aim at either as a means or an end (MD 91). Foot believes that this principle is necessary because the principle of doing and allowing does not cover some morally significant distinctions. For example, consider a case in which we possess a certain drug, but only enough to either cure one person suffering from a fatal condition, or to save five others who are suffering from a milder, though still fatal case of the same illness. In such a circumstance, we can permissibly give the drug to the five who are suffering from the milder form of the disease. If we could save all six, we would surely do so. Clearly, we do not intend the death of the one, though we foresee it as a consequence of our actions. On the other hand, it is not permissible to withhold a live-saving drug from one to use his organs to save the lives of the five others after he dies. In this case, the death of the one is an essential means to the achievement of the end and so his death is strictly intended. Although in such a case I would be allowing someone to die rather than perpetrating a killing by my own agency, what I do is impermissible. Only the doctrine of double effect captures the distinction between these cases, on Foot’s view. Yet the doctrine of double effect cannot stand on its own, according to Foot; we need both the principle of double effect and the principle of doing and allowing. After all, we can sometimes impermissibly initiate harm with indirect intention. She gives the example of wicked merchants who knowingly sell poisoned oil: their intention is not to harm their customers, but only to turn a profit, yet they are clearly initiating a harmful causal sequence.
These principles systematize non-consequentialist ‘common morality’, and Foot puts these principles to use in her treatment of abortion and euthanasia. Foot is skeptical of any attempt to resolve the abortion debate without settling the issue of whether and when the fetus has moral rights, and she regards this as an intractable issue (MD 87). In this view, she takes sides against Judith Jarvis Thomson, who argued that some abortions are permissible even if we allow for the sake of argument that the fetus has full moral status. Thomson argues by analogy: imagine that while we sleep a group of music lovers stealthily attach to us a famous violinist who is suffering from an ailment, and we uniquely can keep him alive for roughly nine months, as he convalesces (Thomson 1971: 48). The question is: may we detach the violinist, causing his death? Thomson argues that we may, since our negative rights have been violated and no one has the right to use another’s body, even to save his own life. Of course, the analogy here is limited to cases of non-consensual impregnation, such as those resulting from rape.
Foot argues that the analogy has a devastating fault. There is a morally significant difference between unhooking someone from one’s own body, which does not involve initiating a fatal causal sequence, since the person was already in the grips of a fatal condition before being hooked up to us, and abortion, which does initiate a fatal sequence. Foot believes that this makes abortion seem like Rescue II, whereas the unhooking of the violinist is like Rescue I. As Foot puts it,
the fetus is not in jeopardy because it is in its mother’s womb; it is merely dependent on her in the way children are dependent on their parents for food. (MD 87)
Rejecting Thomson’s view, which attempts to show that some instances of abortion are permissible even if the fetus is fully a moral person, Foot’s considered position on abortion is that it turns on precisely the issue Thomson wishes to set aside. On this issue, she rather surprisingly abandons her commitment to objectivity, claiming that it is a matter for a community to decide whether to count the fetus as a human being (MD 7).
Perhaps Foot’s most penetrating article on applied ethics is her “Euthanasia” (1977). Foot defines euthanasia as a killing that is for the good of the individual in question, and she asks whether such an act can ever be permissible. One central question here is whether it can ever be good for an individual to be deprived of his life, and hence one of Foot’s central purposes is to determine what sort of a good life is for a person. She rejects the narrowly hedonistic view that the value of life is determined by the balance of pleasure versus pain it promises. On her view, life is often still a good to someone who is suffering and who is likely to continue in such a state. Yet she also argues that merely being alive without suffering is not a good (VV 42). What is of value, on her view, is the ordinary human life that contains at least a minimum of “basic human goods”, which include:
that a man is not driven to work far beyond his capacity; that he has the support of a family or community; that he can more or less satisfy his hunger; that he has hopes for the future; that he can lie down to rest at night. (Ibid.)
In the absence of such minimal goods, she argues that life is not a good to a person.
The issue of the permissibility of euthanasia for Foot, then, turns to issues about justice and charity (VV 44). On her view, even when it seems better for someone not to survive, we must respect that person’s rights. Hence, on her view, involuntary active euthanasia can never be permissible. On the other hand, the right to assistance in staying alive calls upon the charity of others and not justice, except in the case of a doctor who has a contractual duty to help keep us alive. Yet even in the case of a doctor, where assistance is a matter of justice, our claim on that assistance is limited by the claims of others as well as a regard for our well-being. That is, there may come a point at which such ‘assistance’ as a doctor can offer to prolong a patient’s life does not actually confer any benefit, and in such a case, it is not contrary to justice or charity for the doctor to withhold treatment; as Foot points out, such instances of passive euthanasia are already widely practiced (VV 56). However, she argues that it may be justifiable not to prolong the life of someone who wants to live, giving the example of a dying soldier whose life could be prolonged with a certain drug, but who would thereby face death by starvation. According to Foot, nonvoluntary passive euthanasia is permissible in such an instance.
Of course, the central controversy here is whether voluntary active euthanasia is permissible. She dismisses James Rachels’ claim that if we permit passive euthanasia then the only consistent position is to permit active euthanasia in similar circumstances because it is ‘more humane’ than passive euthanasia (Rachels 1975). Foot argues by analogy that it may be ‘more humane’ to deprive someone of property that is bringing evil to him, but nevertheless taking it away would be contrary to justice (VV 50). On the other hand, someone may give permission for the destruction of his property, and as Foot concludes,
If someone gives you permission to destroy his property it can no longer be said that you have no right to do so, and I do not see why it should not be the same with taking a man’s life. (VV 53)
Nevertheless, Foot admits that the moral issue is not entirely resolved by the matter of rights, so it does not follow that there is no moral objection to doing something because it would involve no violation of rights. It is then a matter of whether it would be good for the person to die and, hence, whether it would be contrary to charity. This rules out cases in which death is wished for by someone who is facing a life of dependency because they are worried about being a burden on others. In such circumstances, other things being equal, the death would not be for the good of the person. Foot also has concerns about the practice of euthanasia that make her hesitate to suggest that the practice ought to be more widely legalized.