Future of dentistry has become one of the most unique resources and providers of this oral systemic
approach. In determining the patient's unique needs, it is becoming increasingly important for the
dentist to work with other cutting-edge, integrative practitioners to fully assess the individual
requirements of the patient before, during, and after dental care. Witnessing the beginning of truly
groundbreaking advances in technology is a rare opportunity. Skepticism is a natural reaction when we
are presented with a radically new method and its potential uses. Skepticism helps us filter the valuable
from the worthless, the permanent from the ephemeral, and the rational from the preposterous. The
present article describes a brief review on some of the breakthrough advances in dentistry regarding
tissue engineering, nanodentistry and ozone therapy.
Key words: Nanodentistry, ozone therapy, tissue engineering.
INTRODUCTION
Patients today are increasingly taking more responsibility
for their own health care. They tend to be well-read,
educated by previous health-care experiences, and much
more discriminating in their own choice of practitioners
and treatment methods. As health practitioners struggling
with the complex task of helping these patients achieve
optimum wellness, we should constantly search for the
information that best answers their questions and offers
solutions to their health concerns (Kumar et al., 2010).
Nanodentistry will make possible the maintenance of
comprehensive oral health by employing nanomaterials,
biotechnology including tissue engineering, and
ultimately, dental nanorobotics (nanomedicine). When the
first micron-size dental nanorobots can be constructed in
10 to 20 years, these devices will allow precisely
controlled oral analgesia, dentition replacement therapy
using biologically autologous whole replacement teeth
manufactured during a single office visit, and rapid
nanometer-scale precision restorative dentistry. New
treatment opportunities may include dentition
renaturalization, permanent hypersensitivity cure,
complete orthodontic realignments during a single office
visit, covalently-bonded diamondized enamel, and
continuous oral health maintenance using mechanical
dentifrobots (Sharma et al., 2010).
Most of people possess a fear towards dentistry. On
account of this fear, they avoid the dental treatment.
Infact, people fear injections and drills that are used in
dental clinics. Although, in recent time, dentistry has been
experiencing a period of dynamic changes and growth,
perhaps like no other time before. The use of ozone in
dental treatment is the result of this dynamics and
growth. Incorporation of ozone in dental clinic set-ups
would eradicate the feeling of pain during dental
treatment and also cut off the treatment time,
significantly. Ozone has been shown to stimulate
remineralization of recent caries-affected teeth after a
period of about six to eight weeks. Scientific support, as
suggested by demonstrated studies, for ozone therapy
presents a potential for an atraumatic, biologically-based
treatment for conditions encountered in dental practice
(Garg and Tandon, 2009).
A new direction in the field of vital pulp therapy is given
by the introduction of tissue engineering as an emerging
science. It aims to regenerate a functional tooth-tissue
structure by the interplay of three basic key elements:
stem cells, morphogens and scaffolds. It is a
multidisciplinary approach that combines the principles of
biology, medicine, and engineering to repair and/or
regenerate a damaged tissue and/or organ (Malhotra et 
2 J. Dev. Biol. Tissue Eng.
al., 2009).
The present review article describes the future of
dentistry and possible different treatment modalities in
the future including nanodentistry, ozone therapy and
tissue engineering. We hope this mini review article be
useful for all dentists and our colleagues and open a new
era in field of dentistry. 