In hermeneutics, interpretive experience is typically clarified in reference to understanding. In this context, when we say that we understand, what we mean is that we have really gotten at something through an attempt at interpretation; and, when we say we do not understand, we mean that we have not really gotten anywhere at all with our interpretation. For this reason, understanding can be described as a ‘success’ of interpretation (even if, since Heidegger, understanding is more commonly described as a fulfillment, realization, or enactment). In hermeneutics, such success of understanding is not measured by norms and methods typical of the modern natural sciences and quantitative social sciences, such as whether our understanding derives from a repeatable experiment, nor by norms typical of much of modern philosophy, such as whether our understanding has indubitable epistemic foundations.
Now, philosophers associated with hermeneutics describe the success of understanding in a number of manners. However else the success of understanding is described, though, it is typically also described as edifying or educative. Indeed, Hans-Georg Gadamer, the philosopher perhaps most closely associated with hermeneutics in our times, closely connects interpretive experience with education. By education, he has in mind the concept of formation (Bildung) that had been developed in Weimar classicism and that continued to influence nineteenth-century romanticism and historicism in Germany (Truth and Method, Part I.1).[1] Education, as formation, involves more than the acquisition of expertise, knowledge, or information; it concerns the enlargement of our person though formal instruction, especially in the arts and humanities, as well as through extensive and variegated experience. Accordingly, the success of understanding is educative in that we learn from our interpretive experience, perhaps not only about a matter, but thereby also about ourselves, the world, and others.
That the success of understanding is educative in this manner can be clarified by an example, say, in reading a text such as Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War. When we say that we understand this text, we mean that our attempts to interpret it (whether rigorously, as in scholarship, or more casually, as in evening reading) have gotten at something, perhaps: that in politics, prudent reasoning is not always persuasive enough to stem the tide of war. Certainly, we have not arrived at this understanding in result of repeatable scientific experiment or based on an indubitable epistemic foundation. But it is not for this reason any less educative. In this understanding, we have come to something that we can agree or disagree with, something that in any case expands or changes our views about the role of reason in politics (and no doubt then also of public discourse and the causes of war), and, finally, something that can also teach us something about ourselves and the world in which we find ourselves.