This study investigated the economic effects of malaria on cocoa farmers in Ondo State, Nigeria using the ordinary least square regression technique. Descriptive statistics were used to identify strategies to reduce malaria infection among cocoa farmers. The sample frame for the study was derived from secondary data obtained from records of Ondo State Ministry of Health on registered cocoa farmers who had malaria during the production season in 2015. Multi-stage, systematic and purposive samplings were used to select 180 respondents for the study. Some of the variables measured include: annual income of farmers, direct cost of malaria treatment, number of days of incapacitation and additional labour cost incurred by the farmers during periods of incapacitation. Results from the study showed that the mean annual income estimate was ₦524,096. It was revealed that the cost of malaria treatment and additional labour cost incurred had  a significant effect on the income of the farmers, however; the number of days of incapacitation had no significant effect on the income of cocoa farmers.
Key words: Malaria, income, ordinary least squares regression and cocoa.
 INTRODUCTION
Economic growth and development are achievable in any nation with a viable agricultural sector. Most developed nations of the world are characterized by technology-driven farm production activities. This has enhanced self-sufficiency in feeding their populace. In developing countries, on the other hand, farm production activities depend largely on people in the rural areas using manual labour. Owing to the physical nature of farming activities, the health of farmers could be adversely affected by diseases including malaria if they have little or no medical attention. Medical issues have been observed to impact negatively on agricultural productivity in Nigeria and malaria has been a major contributor to ill health in Africa (Breman et al., 2006). According to Kwadwo et al. (2009), human activities, including agriculture has been recognized as one of the reasons for increased intensity of malaria around the world, because it supports the breeding of mosquitoes that carries the parasite. Mohammed et al. (2018) posited that a greater percentage of small-scale farmers in Nigeria leave (sic) in  the rural areas. A typical rural village in the country is characterized with an indecent environment, poor housing, bushy surroundings, and exposed water in wells and gutters. These aforementioned characteristics are reproducing grounds for mosquitoes that in turn inject malaria parasites on the rural people. Malaria as a life-threatening disease is caused by parasites that are transmitted to people through the bites of infected female Anopheles mosquitoes (World Health Organization, 2016).
Despite being a preventable and treatable disease, malaria accounts for about 212 million of cases and 429,000 deaths globally in 2015 alone (World Health Organization, 2016). More than 80% of the estimated malaria deaths in 2012 occurred in just 17 countries, and 80% of cases occur in 18 countries, with the Democratic Republic of Congo and Nigeria together accounting for 40% of the estimated global total (World Health Organization, 2012; National Population Commission et al., 2012).
The recurrent nature of malaria and a coincidence of malaria peak season with harvesting season accentuated the burden for the rural poor who are already dependent on subsistence farming and with limited coping options (Adhanom et al., 2006; Chuma et al., 2006). Thus, malaria is expected to affect the income of farmers in the farming season. Evidence on the economic burden of malaria is important for prioritization of prevention and treatment service at the national and sub-national levels and facilitates better resource allocation in the health care system (McIntyre et al., 2006; Larg and Moss, 2011). Comparing evidence of economic burden of malaria from different settings, time periods, patient groups, and epidemiological profiles is challenging (Drummond, 2015), hence traditionally, studies that have attempted to estimate the economic burden of malaria have focused on the private and non-private medical costs associated with the disease, as well as some measure of the income that is forgone as a result of malaria morbidity and mortality (Jefferey and Pia, 2002).
There are no empirical evidence to investigate the effect of malaria on income of cocoa farmers, although there have been studies that addressed malaria effects on crop farmers in general. There have also been studies that focused on how sickness generally affect cocoa farmers; however, there is no study that focused on the economic effects of malaria on cocoa farmers. An intensified and increased commitment and financial allocation for malaria prevention and control measures have reduced the burden of malaria mortality rate among under-five children by 29% globally within five years since 2010 (World Health Organization, 2016), hence a little insight into the challenges posed by malaria on cocoa farmers will help policy makers especially non-governmental organizations interested in boosting cocoa exportation among developing countries, in formulating the  right  policies  aimed  at  reducing  malaria  incidence among cocoa farmers.