Set theory, as a separate mathematical discipline, begins in the work of Georg Cantor. One might say that set theory was born in late 1873, when he made the amazing discovery that the linear continuum, that is, the real line, is not countable, meaning that its points cannot be counted using the natural numbers. So, even though the set of natural numbers and the set of real numbers are both infinite, there are more real numbers than there are natural numbers, which opened the door to the investigation of the different sizes of infinity. See the entry on the early development of set theory for a discussion of the origin of set-theoretic ideas and their use by different mathematicians and philosophers before and around Cantor’s time.
According to Cantor, two sets A and B have the same size, or cardinality, if they are bijectable, i.e., the elements of A can be put in a one-to-one correspondence with the elements of B. Thus, the set ℕ of natural numbers and the set ℝ of real numbers have different cardinalities. In 1878 Cantor formulated the famous Continuum Hypothesis (CH), which asserts that every infinite set of real numbers is either countable, i.e., it has the same cardinality as ℕ, or has the same cardinality as ℝ. In other words, there are only two possible sizes of infinite sets of real numbers. The CH is the most famous problem of set theory. Cantor himself devoted much effort to it, and so did many other leading mathematicians of the first half of the twentieth century, such as Hilbert, who listed the CH as the first problem in his celebrated list of 23 unsolved mathematical problems presented in 1900 at the Second International Congress of Mathematicians, in Paris. The attempts to prove the CH led to major discoveries in set theory, such as the theory of constructible sets, and the forcing technique, which showed that the CH can neither be proved nor disproved from the usual axioms of set theory. To this day, the CH remains open.
Early on, some inconsistencies, or paradoxes, arose from a naive use of the notion of set; in particular, from the deceivingly natural assumption that every property determines a set, namely the set of objects that have the property. One example is Russell’s Paradox, also known to Zermelo:
consider the property of sets of not being members of themselves. If the property determines a set, call it A, then A is a member of itself if and only if A is not a member of itself.
Thus, some collections, like the collection of all sets, the collection of all ordinals numbers, or the collection of all cardinal numbers, are not sets. Such collections are called proper classes.
In order to avoid the paradoxes and put it on a firm footing, set theory had to be axiomatized. The first axiomatization was due to Zermelo (1908) and it came as a result of the need to spell out the basic set-theoretic principles underlying his proof of Cantor’s Well-Ordering Principle. Zermelo’s axiomatization avoids Russell’s Paradox by means of the Separation axiom, which is formulated as quantifying over properties of sets, and thus it is a second-order statement. Further work by Skolem and Fraenkel led to the formalization of the Separation axiom in terms of formulas of first-order, instead of the informal notion of property, as well as to the introduction of the axiom of Replacement, which is also formulated as an axiom schema for first-order formulas (see next section). The axiom of Replacement is needed for a proper development of the theory of transfinite ordinals and cardinals, using transfinite recursion (see Section 3). It is also needed to prove the existence of such simple sets as the set of hereditarily finite sets, i.e., those finite sets whose elements are finite, the elements of which are also finite, and so on; or to prove basic set-theoretic facts such as that every set is contained in a transitive set, i.e., a set that contains all elements of its elements (see Mathias 2001 for the weaknesses of Zermelo set theory). A further addition, by von Neumann, of the axiom of Foundation, led to the standard axiom system of set theory, known as the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms plus the Axiom of Choice, or ZFC.
Other axiomatizations of set theory, such as those of von Neumann-Bernays-Gödel (NBG), or Morse-Kelley (MK), allow also for a formal treatment of proper classes.