Regius attributed his appointment at Utrecht University to his familiarity with and support for Cartesian philosophy, which was acquired initially by reading Descartes’ first book, the Discours de la Méthode … plus la Dioptrique, les Météores et la Géometrie, 1637 (AT, vol. VI). Regius was sympathetic to Cartesian natural philosophy from his initial reading and began to teach it to students, in private lessons, and to dictate notes with a view to publishing his own summary of natural philosophy based on Cartesian principles. This objective was further encouraged when he read a copy of Descartes’ unpublished manuscript, Le Monde (AT, vol. XI), in 1641. The natural philosophy of Le Monde rejected scholastic forms and qualities as philosophical entities that contributed nothing to an explanation of natural phenomena. There was a significant difference, however, in a university such as Utrecht between not relying on scholastic forms and criticizing them publicly. The transition from the former to the latter, in the case of Regius, occurred in 1641.
While preparing Physiologia (Regius 1641a), Regius sent advance copies of draft disputations to Descartes. Since they were being presented in Utrecht as examples of Cartesian philosophy, Descartes recommended various changes, both to avoid needless controversy (for example, concerning blood circulation) and, more importantly, to avoid accusations of heresy against himself or Regius. Accordingly, he asked Regius to correct the thesis that the human soul is three-fold, and to argue instead that “in human beings the soul is one, namely a rational soul” (AT III, 369–74: Bos 2002, 63–69). During the year 1641, this pattern of prior consultation with Descartes continued; Regius accepted many of Descartes’ suggestions, and incorporated them into the final versions of the disputations.
In November 1641, however, the Utrecht professor inaugurated another series of disputations in which he transgressed from medicine to philosophy and, by implication, into theology, and thereby provoked a controversy that continued for more than a decade. The most explicit challenge to established Aristotelian teaching occurred when one of Regius’ students, Henricus van Loon, claimed in a disputation (8 December 1641) that the human mind and body are two distinct substances which are joined together in an accidental union [unum per accidens]. This thesis addressed, perhaps inadvertently, one of the most contentious issues in Christian philosophy and theology, viz. how to understand the unity of human nature, as experienced by each subject, and at the same time defend the traditional Christian beliefs in the immortality of the human soul or mind and the resurrection of the body. The immortality of the soul seemed to presuppose that the mind or soul was capable of existing without the body and, for that reason, that it should be classified as an Aristotelian substance. When Descartes was informed about this disputation (when it was already too late to recommend amendments), he responded that there was hardly anything more likely to offend or antagonize theologians than to say that a human being “is an accidental being” (AT III, 460: Bos 2002, 90–91).
Voetius, with the support of his professorial colleagues in theology, replied to Regius by appending corollaries to his own theological disputations, in December 1641, in which he accused proponents of the ‘new philosophy’ [i.e., Cartesianism] of a number of errors: teaching that a human being is an accidental being, defending Copernicanism, and supporting scepticism and irreligion by denying substantial forms. In the course of these replies to Regius, Descartes’ name was also mentioned, and it was clear that Regius and Descartes were perceived by Voetius as jointly attempting to undermine the philosophical foundations of Calvinist theology as taught at Utrecht. Initially, Descartes joined the debate merely by advising Regius how to respond appropriately to Voetius. One part of that advice was that Regius should have dealt with substantial forms as Descartes had done in the Météores (AT VI, 239): that he should not have rejected them explicitly but, instead, should merely have omitted them as redundant to genuine explanations.
However, Descartes also provided Regius with philosophical arguments in reply to Voetius. He outlined a number of reasons why they were jointly opposed to describing the human mind as a substantial form. To say that human beings think because they have a ‘thinking form’ explains nothing; secondly, those who postulate the existence of substantial forms are unable to say more precisely what they are, and thus they appeal to ‘occult’ realities that they do not understand; and, perhaps most importantly, if the alleged substantial forms of other natural phenomena were made redundant by developments in physics, there would be a danger that the spirituality of the mind or soul would be compromised by similar advances in the sciences. “All the arguments that are used to prove substantial forms may be applied to the form of a clock, although no one claims that it is substantial” (AT III, 505: Bos 2002, 115). Many of Descartes’ suggestions were incorporated, as amendments, into the final version of the Regius’ reply to Voetius, which appeared as Responsio, sive notae in Appendicem (Regius 1642) on 16 February 1642. This further inflamed the situation. The following month, Regius was forbidden by the University to teach natural philosophy in public or in private, and was restricted to lecturing in traditional medicine. The Academic Senate, with the approval of the town council, also issued an official condemnation of Cartesian philosophy.