The orbital parameters of dark matter (DM) subhaloes play an essential role in determining
their mass-loss rates and overall spatial distribution within a host halo. Haloes in cosmological
simulations grow by a combination of relatively smooth accretion and more violent mergers,
and both processes will modify subhalo orbits. To isolate the impact of the smooth growth of the
host halo from other relevant mechanisms, we study subhalo orbital evolution using numerical
calculations in which subhaloes are modelled as massless particles orbiting in a time-varying
spherical potential. We find that the radial action of the subhalo orbit decreases over the first
few orbits, indicating that the response to the growth of the host halo is not adiabatic during this
phase. The subhalo orbits can shrink by a factor of ∼1.5 in this phase. Subsequently, the radial
action is well conserved and orbital contraction slows down. We propose a model accurately
describing the orbital evolution. Given these results, we consider the spatial distribution of the
population of subhaloes identified in high-resolution cosmological simulations. We find that it
is consistent with this population having been accreted at 𝑧 <
∼
3, indicating that any subhaloes
accreted earlier are unresolved in the simulations. We also discuss tidal stripping as a formation
scenario for NGC1052-DF2, an ultra diffuse galaxy significantly lacking DM, and find that
its expected DM mass could be consistent with observational constraints if its progenitor was
accreted early enough, 𝑧 >
∼
1.5, although it should still be a relatively rare object.
Key words: galaxies: haloes – galaxies: kinematics and dynamics – cosmology: dark matter
– methods: numerical
1 INTRODUCTION
In the standard paradigm for structure formation in the Universe, the
Λ cold dark matter (ΛCDM) cosmological model, small dark matter
(DM) haloes form early on through gravitational collapse, and then
merge to form larger structures subsequently. At the same time,
baryonic gas cools within haloes over some mass scale, igniting
galaxy formation. As a result, the hierarchy of observed galaxies
is formed (e.g., White & Rees 1978; Frenk & White 2012), i.e.,
smaller DM subhaloes and associated satellite galaxies, orbiting
within larger host systems consisting of a host DM halo and a
central galaxy. In this paper, we consider the orbital evolution of
subhaloes in their host halo, given the mass assembly history of the
latter.
The orbital parameters of subhaloes are essential in determining their spatial distribution and mass-loss rates, and thus they are
an important input to observational tests of the nature of DM. For
instance, in a structure formation scenario based on an alternative
DM model, warm dark matter (WDM), the primordial density fluctuations on small scales are smoothed out by the free-streaming
motion of WDM particles, and fewer subhaloes are formed, while
the minimum halo mass is greater than in the ΛCDM cosmology
(Bode et al. 2001; Angulo et al. 2013; Lovell et al. 2014; Bose et al.
2016, and references therein). This should affect both the abundance
and the spatial distribution of subhaloes, since the formation of the
earliest, densest structures would be suppressed. Tests of DM based
on observations of gravitational lensing (e.g., Dalal & Kochanek
2002; Vegetti et al. 2012; Shu et al. 2015; Hezaveh et al. 2016),
gaps in stellar streams (e.g., Carlberg 2012; Ngan & Carlberg 2014;
Erkal et al. 2016; Ibata et al. 2020), and annihilation or decay signals
of DM particles (e.g., Strigari et al. 2007; Pieri et al. 2008; Hayashi
et al. 2016; Hiroshima et al. 2018; Okoli et al. 2018) also depend
strongly on the expected abundance, spatial distribution and mass
function of DM subhaloes.