Production of orange-fleshed sweet potato (OFSP) in Tanzania is constrained by the underutilization of
virus-free improved certified planting materials. The sustainable use of these planting materials leads to
the constant demand of the planting materials by farmers which can be triggered from viable
processing. We determine the viability of processing in the OFSP value chain and its contribution to the
uptake of high-quality improved planting materials. Data for this study were collected by field survey
method from 15 processors and 150 farmers. Purposive and three-stage random sampling methods
were used in sampling. We adopted a mixed method of analysis using descriptive statistics, gross
margin analysis, and econometric estimation of the multivariate probit model by means of a Simulated
Maximum Likelihood (SML). We found no direct effect of processing to trigger the use of improved
OFSP planting materials unless formalization of the supply arrangements between processors and
farmers is institutionalized. However, it was economically viable to engage in the processing of OFSP.
Processors were found to be generating a benefit of US$ 76/ton of OFSP processed with a margin to a
total cost ratio of 19% implying a relatively low margin with significant processing costs. Seed renewal
was low as 63.1% of the farmers used retained planting materials. Nevertheless, contractual
arrangements with the processors increased the desire to use high-quality improved planting materials
and the likelihood to source them from research institutes (p<0.05). Additionally, access to credit and a
high level of specialization influenced farmers to source planting materials from local vine multipliers.
Creation of market linkage and formalization of supply arrangements between processors and farmers
and awareness creation on the economic benefits of seed renewal will increase the benefits generated
by processors. This may contribute to the uptake of high-quality improved OFSP planting materials in
Tanzania.
Key words: Economic viability, orange fleshed sweet potato, processing, value chain, market linkage.
INTRODUCTION
Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas Lam) is one of the most
important food crops worldwide. In Africa, the crop is
used for food and income though its marketing is limited
by its short shelf life (Rees et al., 2001; Oladoye et al.,
2016; Flores, 2018). In Tanzania, sweet potato is an
important food security root crop after cassava being
grown by 1.08 million smallholder farmers (NBS, 2017).
With its annual production of 4.2 million tons per annum,
Tanzania is the leading producer in Africa, and accounts
for 3.8% of the world’s sweet potato production (FAO,
2020).
The crop has consistent reliable yields, due to the
reason that it can be grown on marginal land, and thus
suitable for areas with long dry seasons. The crop is
useful disaster recovery crop when other crops fail.
Sweet potatoes are also important source of food in the
homes of the rural and urban poor and important income
source for households in Tanzania. Sweet potato lies
within its adaptability to marginal conditions such as
drought, low soil fertility, and thus make it ranked highly
as food security crop when local staple crops such as
maize and rice fail (HKI, 2012; Waziri, 2013).
Tanzania ranks fifth in the world in terms of sweet potato
production (HKI, 2012). Tanzania’s production data for
sweet potato show that there had been increasing trends
in the production and area under sweet potato production
in the country from year 2008 to 2018 (NBS, 2020).
However, there is no disaggregated data that would
indicate the level of Orange Fleshed Sweet Potatoes
(OFSP) and the White Fleshed Sweet Potatoes (WFSP)
production. OFSP are rich in beta carotene, a vitamin A
precursor for improving the nutrition of people especially
children under five years of age. They have high content
of carotenoids and pleasant sensory characteristics with
color (Neela and Fanta, 2019). 