After selecting Carl as her partner, Jenny needed to start planning for the dance competition at her school. The competition started in two months. Jenny was aware that Carl was not a great dancer. She had to dedicate some time in helping him improve his skill. On the first few days of preparation, Jenny had planned out their dance routine, with the help of her teacher. They were going to be dancing to "Jailhouse Rock" by Elvis Presley.
 
Jenny and Carl spent the first two weeks memorizing their steps and cues to their dance. Carl was pretty clumsy at first. He eventually got the hang of it. They spent the rest of the time perfecting their moves. The day of the competition was almost near. Jenny and Carl were beginning to get nervous. They were going up against nine other pairs from the same school.
The day of the competition arrived. Carl had not become a great dancer, but had definitely improved since he began. Since Jenny won last year's competition, she was to perform with Carl last. The pairs that were performing this year were better dancers compared to last year's competition. As each pair took the stage one by one, Jenny grew more anxious. Carl noticed this from Jenny and told her, "It'll be okay, Jenny. You are great, and I'm sure we'll win." Jenny felt better after hearing Carl's words. Soon, it was their turn to perform. They walked on stage and began to dance as soon as their song started to play.
They were off to a great start. Jenny's class was there cheering them on. The crowd began cheering them on as well. Suddenly, Jenny tripped and fell. The crowd was shocked. Carl managed to get Jenny back up on time for their big finale. Jenny was upset because of her fall. After their performance, the judges tallied up the scores and were ready to announce the winner. Jenny and Carl won, but it was a close call. If it wasn't for Jenny's talent and Carl's quick thinking to keep the routine going, they wouldn't have won. They were both awarded with a trophy and medals. Jenny and Carl were full of cheer.
