Guide to Digital Games and Learning
How can games unlock a rich world of learning? This is the big question at the heart of the growing ‘games and learning’
movement that’s gaining momentum in education. The Guide to Digital Games and Learning explains key ideas in
game-based learning, pedagogy, implementation, and assessment. This guide makes sense of the available research,
and provides suggestions for practical use.
The Guide to Digital Games and Learning started as a series of blog posts
written by Jordan Shapiro with support from the Joan Ganz Cooney Center at
Sesame Workshop and the Games and Learning Publishing Council. We’ve
brought together what we felt would be the most relevant highlights of Jordan’s
posts. We wanted to create a dynamic, in-depth guide that answers many of the
most pressing questions that educators, parents, and life-long learners have
raised – questions around using digital games for learning. While we had
educators in mind when developing this guide, any lifelong learner can use it to
develop a sense of how to navigate the games space in an informed and
meaningful way.
We urge you to read it. Start with the introduction that provides an overview of games in the classroom. Then go straight to
the second section which presents the way in which the research around digital games is evolving and talks about how
pediatricians, academics, educators, and researchers are working to find answers to how games and technology affect
learners of all ages. The third section, on ‘How to Start Using Digital Games for Learning’, provides examples of how some
educators are using digital games in the classroom and how they find support when running into difficulties. The next
section, ‘How to Choose a Digital Learning Game’, gives you a starting point for game selection by providing an
understanding of the types of games available in the marketplace and how to go about selecting them. Ideas about how to
overcome obstacles for using digital games in the classroom are presented in the next section and, finally, the last section
takes an in-depth look at how some teachers are using games in the classroom and their real-life struggles and victories.