Text A:
I am not a very sporty person. There aren’t too many sports that I like doing. I have tried playing
tennis in a club but I was so bad at it that nobody wanted to play with me. So I gave it up. Ball games
are not my world. There is one activity, however, which I really enjoy, and that is cycling. Every day
when I get home from work I take my bike from the garage and off I go. I usually cycle for about an
hour except when it rains. I avoid the busy streets of my town and I especially enjoy cycling along
forest paths. As for my diet, I am not a very healthy eater and I must admit that I eat a very big
dinner every evening.
Text B:
I work in an office and sit in front of the computer all day. Life for clerical workers has become
very unhealthy lately because of the lack of physical activity. So last month I decided to change my
way of life. It was easier said than done. As a first step, I used my lunchtime to go for short walks. I
find this really enjoyable even when it rains. It’s amazing how fast you can eat lunch if you want to
have some extra time for something else. Then, two weeks ago I joined a gym. The first time was a
nightmare but gradually it became easier and I hope I can manage to go at least twice a week in the
future. If I can keep this schedule, I think I’ve done a lot for my health.
Text C:
I have always enjoyed keeping active from a very young age. I participated in different sporting
events at school such as volleyball, basketball and athletics events. At university I won several
running races as a member of the athletics club, so running has become my favourite activity.
Today I not only go jogging regularly but I started training for the marathon. I get some help from
a professional trainer because I need a training schedule that I can follow. This takes up a lot of my
time so I don’t go out much. Also I have to watch my diet if I want to be successful at the marathon.
Some people may think that this is very tiring but I enjoy every minute of it. In fact I enjoy all sorts
of exercise but I am not a fan of swimming.
Text D:
My attitude to sports is strange. At least that’s what my friends say. I am only physically active
during the summer. In winter I prefer sitting in a warm room reading a book or watching television.
I watch a lot of sports, like tennis or skiing, but I don’t do anything to keep fit. However, when
winter is over and the weather becomes warmer I wake up from my winter sleep and become really
active. I am mad about water sports. I am a member of a rowing club and also a sailing club and I
play water polo in a team. I have a small sailing boat and I spend my holidays sailing on the sea.
I know people find it funny that someone who loves water so much doesn’t do any swimming in
winter, but the swimming pool is not for me. I prefer natural water. 