Report on staff engagement at Girox Foods
Introduction
At Girox Foods, we are experiencing an annual employee turnover of about 12 per cent. Although this might not seem high at first glance, the industry standard is seven per cent. The principal objective of this report is to investigate the causes of employee engagement within the firm and, based on those, offer recommendations to improve the employees' experience of the workplace and increase employee retention.
Research methods
This study was conducted with over 500 employees of Girox Foods between March and August 2018, with the aim of understanding their experience and expectations of the workplace. The study covered the 80 branches of Girox Foods located in 20 European countries. In addition to the 500 questionnaires filled out by Girox employees, 120 also participated in ten separate focus groups where participants took part in discussions about their levels of engagement in Girox and their hopes for the future.
Key research findings
The top reason for employee disengagement given by 35 per cent of those surveyed is the lack of challenging work, followed by having too many working hours (34 per cent).
43 per cent of those surveyed said that the top reason for employees quitting their jobs was a lack of recognition, while 31 per cent stated that it was due to bad management.
There was no correlation between salaries and level of employee engagement.
47 per cent stated that their levels of engagement would improve if they felt more ownership of their work. 45 per cent wanted more flexibility both in terms of working hours and locations. 42 per cent were keen to see the company investing more in their career development.
59 per cent felt that their commitment to the company would improve if they were given training opportunities to improve their business skills. 64 per cent rated social and cross-cultural intelligence as the most important skill needed in the workplace.
41 per cent of respondents felt that there should be increased transparency in company communications, as this would lead to increased trust and more informed decision making.
Recommendations
On the basis of these findings, we recommend that Girox Foods adopt a more people-oriented management style. As part of this, we should explore ways of offering more flexible working hours to our employees and consider how we can enable employees to work from their chosen locations. Managers need to consider a variety of ways to challenge our staff and provide more positive reinforcement and recognition of the work they do. Increased investment in professional development, especially in the area of social and intercultural communication, could also contribute to creating a positive environment for employees to produce their best work.