Freelancing, by definition, involves offering your skills
to a variety of clients. You are claiming some specialist
expertise, be it in management consultancy, journalism,
graphic design or vehicle repair. But whatever it is, in
order to make that claim, you must either have done the
job before, or be trained in it in some convincingly
applied way.
It is possible to become a freelance
designer, for instance, on the basis of
having done a degree course because
such courses are generally practically
oriented. Or you could become a
translator having taken a language
degree.
Your credentials would be less impressive if you tried to
set up as a management consultant, having had no
experience other than a business studies qualification, or
if you tried to become a journalist on the basis of an
English degree. The first thing you will have to do as a
freelancer, therefore, is to see that your level of expertise
is appropriate to the area where you want to apply it as a
freelancer.
In many cases, freelancers are ex-employees and they
generally begin by working for their ex-employers. A
common situation, for instance, is that a company closes
down a functional area like in-house PR or building
maintenance and asks the people who were doing it
before to take it on as freelancers.
This means that the freelancers can
offer the same service to a variety of
clients without incurring the overheads
that become attached to corporate
activities. Quite often, a function that
is uneconomic for a firm to sustain,
either for that reason or because it is
not fully used, becomes very
profitable to freelancers.
As a freelancer, each approach to a new client is rather
like applying for another job and, as with a job
application, establishing your credibility by showing that
you can do what the job entails is an essential first step.
One way to do that is to demonstrate that you are already
busy, and a list of existing clients – particularly if they
are well-known ones – validates that claim. Some
freelancers do this informally.
For instance, a cameraman said
recently, ‘I never admit I haven’t got
much on. The way I put it is that I’ve
got a spare week or so between
assignments and I mention a couple of
things coming up, even if they’re not
definite at that time. But if I went in
and said “I’m a bit short of work at the
moment – anything doing?” they’d
assume I was going off a bit and
wouldn’t offer me anything.’
In other branches of freelancing, formal evidence of
work done needs to be produced. Some kind of brochure
with the names of your clients and what you did for
them is a good investment as soon as you have worked
for a sufficient number of companies.
Working as a freelancer is in many ways different from
working as an employee. Consider, for example, this
fundamental difference between the two situations. If
you are permanently based in the next office or at least
in the same building as the person or department to
whom you are reporting, it is easy to check back and
clarify aspects of the job as you go along. As a
freelancer though, you are on your own and in many
cases the client is paying you to get on with the job
without bothering him or her.
So if you have been commissioned as
a freelance copywriter, for instance,
the person who commissioned you
does not want to have to deal with
last-minute queries about whether he
or she wants a reply coupon to go with
the ad. These are the sort of questions
that should have been raised at the
briefing session.
That’s the kind of mistake that comes from
inexperience. If you have done similar work for an
organisation before, you probably know what is
expected. But in the case of a first-time assignment it’s
all uncharted territory. Picking up how to go about
doing such work has to be learned and the best way of
doing so is with people who already know you and vice
versa.
In these circumstances, you will at
least be tolerant of each other’s
mistakes and not ask for the
temperamentally or functionally
impossible. For instance, if the person
you are reporting to is careless about
checking subordinates’ work, that
places an extra burden on you to be
correspondingly careful.
How ready your existing contacts are to put freelance
assignments your way is an invaluable clue as to how
marketable your skills are. To some extent you should
know from your own experience what the demand is for
freelancers in your chosen sphere.
For instance, if you are a technical
illustrator, you ought to be aware of
whether there are enough technical
publishers who employ outsiders
rather than in-house staff and, if so,
what the rates of pay are. If the
demand is strong or rising, how
successful you are likely to be depends
on your own skill and speed.
The question of your own ability is one that has to be
faced in considering your chances. Freelancing is not an
easy option for those who cannot hold down a job on
grounds of competence. You have to be good at what
you do to freelance successfully because the client will
turn to someone else if you are not.